sphinx/source/other.rst, before:

=============================
Other Functions and Variables
=============================

We're in the process of migrating the documentation over to a new
tool. As not every page has been migrated yet, this exists to document
new functionality that has no other place to go.

.. include:: inc/other

Ren'Py Version
--------------

.. include:: inc/renpy_version

.. var:: renpy.version_string

    The version number of Ren'Py, as a string of the form "Ren'Py 1.2.3.456".

.. var:: renpy.version_only

    The version number of Ren'Py, without the Ren'Py prefix. A string of
    the form "1.2.3.456".

.. var:: renpy.version_tuple

    The version number of Ren'Py, as a tuple of the form (1, 2, 3, 456).

.. var:: renpy.version_name

    A human readable version name, of the form "Example Version."

.. var:: renpy.license

    A string giving license text that should be included in a game's
    about screen.

Memory Profiling
-----------------

.. include:: inc/memory

Contexts
---------

.. include:: inc/context

renpy.random
-------------

This object is a random number generator that implements
`the Python random number generation interface <http://docs.python.org/release/2.3.4/lib/module-random.html>`_.
Randomness can be generated by calling the various methods this object
exposes. See the Python documentation for the full list, but the most useful
are:


* ``renpy.random.random()``

Return the next random floating point number in the range (0.0, 1.0).


* ``renpy.random.randint(a, b)``

Return a random integer such that a <= N <= b.


* ``renpy.random.choice(seq)``

Return a random element from the non-empty sequence seq.


Unlike the standard Python random number generator, this object cooperates with
rollback, generating the same numbers regardless of how many times we rollback.
It should be used instead of the standard Python random module. ::

    # return a random float between 0 and 1
    $ randfloat = renpy.random.random()

    # return a random integer between 1 and 20
    $ d20roll = renpy.random.randint(1, 20)

    # return a random element from a list
    $ randfruit = renpy.random.choice(['apple', 'orange', 'plum'])

* ``renpy.random.Random(seed=None)``

Returns a new random number generator object separate from the main one, seeded
with the specified value if provided.

Commit message:

Update "Other Functions" with OS functions
*Now with decent grammar
Some of the more recent 4th-wall breaking visual novels have used these functions to great effect, but they aren't documented anywhere. This will hopefully open them up to more developers.

sphinx/source/other.rst, after:

=============================
Other Functions and Variables
=============================

We're in the process of migrating the documentation over to a new
tool. As not every page has been migrated yet, this exists to document
new functionality that has no other place to go.

.. include:: inc/other

Ren'Py Version
--------------

.. include:: inc/renpy_version

.. var:: renpy.version_string

    The version number of Ren'Py, as a string of the form "Ren'Py 1.2.3.456".

.. var:: renpy.version_only

    The version number of Ren'Py, without the Ren'Py prefix. A string of
    the form "1.2.3.456".

.. var:: renpy.version_tuple

    The version number of Ren'Py, as a tuple of the form (1, 2, 3, 456).

.. var:: renpy.version_name

    A human readable version name, of the form "Example Version."

.. var:: renpy.license

    A string giving license text that should be included in a game's
    about screen.
    
Operating System
-----------------
Ren'Py includes functions that return which operating system is currently running the game. While most built-in Ren'Py functions that need OS-specific functionality (like :func:`CommandConsole`) already handle OS-specific behavior for you, these functions can be used to help create your own OS-specific functionality, especially for things like unusual file handling.

.. var:: renpy.windows

    Returns "True" if running on Windows, "False" otherwise.
    
.. var:: renpy.macintosh

    Returns "True" if running on macOS, "False" otherwise.
    
.. var:: renpy.linux

    Returns "True" if running on any Linux distribution, "False" otherwise.
    
.. var:: renpy.android

    Returns "True" if running on an Android platform, "False" otherwise. Be careful not to use this as a check for mobile devices; not all Android devices will neccesarily use a portable touch-screen interface.
    
.. var:: renpy.ios

    Returns "True" if running on an iOS platform, "False" otherwise. While all currently supported iOS devices are mobile touchscreen platforms, be careful not to assume that this will be the case in the future.

Memory Profiling
-----------------

.. include:: inc/memory

Contexts
---------

.. include:: inc/context

renpy.random
-------------

This object is a random number generator that implements
`the Python random number generation interface <http://docs.python.org/release/2.3.4/lib/module-random.html>`_.
Randomness can be generated by calling the various methods this object
exposes. See the Python documentation for the full list, but the most useful
are:


* ``renpy.random.random()``

Return the next random floating point number in the range (0.0, 1.0).


* ``renpy.random.randint(a, b)``

Return a random integer such that a <= N <= b.


* ``renpy.random.choice(seq)``

Return a random element from the non-empty sequence seq.


Unlike the standard Python random number generator, this object cooperates with
rollback, generating the same numbers regardless of how many times we rollback.
It should be used instead of the standard Python random module. ::

    # return a random float between 0 and 1
    $ randfloat = renpy.random.random()

    # return a random integer between 1 and 20
    $ d20roll = renpy.random.randint(1, 20)

    # return a random element from a list
    $ randfruit = renpy.random.choice(['apple', 'orange', 'plum'])

* ``renpy.random.Random(seed=None)``

Returns a new random number generator object separate from the main one, seeded
with the specified value if provided.
